COVID-19 Personal Statement
This section of the application gives you an opportunity to describe how COVID-19 has impacted your educational experience in relation to your academic performance or grading scale. For example: “For the spring semester, my university let us take two classes P/NP and I chose this because..” or “For the spring quarter, my college graded all classes as P/NP and we didn’t have an option for a letter grade.”
________________


Statement of Purpose:
Please include your name and department to which you are applying at the top of your statement.
Statement of Purpose has no word limit, and can include the following information:
* Your research interests and/or professional objectives in international affairs
* How your background has prepared you to pursue these objectives
* How the GPS program will help you achieve these objectives


For most of my life I have lived abroad. As a foreigner, as an outsider, as an American outside of America. I always felt like I needed to return back “home” to be a “real” American. However, after my life abroad I realized that being American is not bound by boundaries, or encapsulated by culture. Being an American is defined by diversity, and being unapologetically yourself. What I learned from my life abroad is that America is a microcosm of the world. I was just studying it from the other side, what I thought was the outside. This first hand life experience instilled in me a deep understanding of the interconnectedness of the world and a desire to serve my country as a Foreign Service Officer.


The seeds of this revelation were planted when I first moved outside of the United States. While I had spent time living abroad due to my fathers military service. We had lived in military bases, a simulacrum of American comforts that made transitioning between stateside and overseas life relatively easy. However, this move to Thailand was different. We were moving due to my mothers work in migration policy. This move exposed me to an international setting, one which I was initially apprehensive about. The yearning to return “home” for a child like myself was strong. 
However, a sit down with my favorite teacher Mr Woods, a fellow American, changed my outlook on life abroad. He told me that I should look at this experience as an opportunity, that “most Americans have never lived outside of America, most of them don't even have their passport.” I took these words to heart. I came out of my shell. I embraced the international nature of my international school. I became friends with Singaporeans, Russians, Saudis, Canadians and more. And when we moved to Manila, I did it again.


When I had the chance to study at University I was able to go to the University of Amsterdam to study sociology and minor in economics. This is when I could finally put into words my experiences as a Third Culture Kid. How as a kid globalization/Americanization allowed me to connect to others through Youtube, Modern Family, music and the NBA. How culture is formed and reformed by individuals and institutions. I learned about the Colonial Episteme, Racism, Capital and Habitus. During my studies I focused mainly on quantitative methods and was only one of around 10 students in my cohort to utilize quantitative methods in my final thesis.
 Throughout my studies I realized how much of the focus was on the United States. I was made to answer questions on why my country is the way it is. This drove me to turn to our history, and delve deep into our socioeconomics, and the promises our constitution makes. I was a representative to my fellow international classmates. I explained our gun culture, car culture, work culture, our unique religiosity and dichotomous political culture. And from my peers I gained valuable insight into similarities and differences of German, French, British, Chinese and Dutch culture. I graduated completing the Honors program, all the while working part time as an analog film technician. 


I believe my 18 years of life experience living abroad and enthusiasm in quantitative sociology and economics would make me a great addition to the school of Global Politics and Study. I would like to pursue a Masters of International Affairs, with a concentration on China, and Mandarin. After which I will attempt the Foreign Service Exam to become a Foreign Service Officer. From talking in person with students at GPS I feel confident that I will feel right at home with the international student base. I am excited to contribute to and learn at UCSD. The focus on quantitative methods is something I enjoy. My studies in sociology showed me the power of qualitative methods, while my minor in economics and interdisciplinary classes I took to graduate with honors taught me the benefits of quantitative and mixed methods. I believe GPS and specifically the MIA can help me strengthen these quantitative methods, and bolster my analytical skills in political economy and policy making. Sharpening these tools, I know, will allow me to serve competently as a Foreign Service Officer of the United States.










________________


I made preparations to return. I left everything behind and came with just two suitcases back to the US. But the more time I've spent in my own country, the more I realize that I'm meant to be representing my country. I recall a conversation with a fellow American at a housewarming party in a new development in East Amsterdam. I forget her name now, but she was the child of two Foreign Service Officers, we connected immediately, as Americans outside of America. We had lived our lives abroad. Back and forth. Couple years here, couple years there. In the end she asked me a question. “Are you planning on going back home?” At the time I was set on returning, an upcoming election, a natural end to my time in Europe, and a chance to reunite with my younger brother and father. “Of course” I said. “Really? Why is that?” I gave her all the reasons. She said that “we are assets, our experience straddling cultures has put us in a unique position, one which most Americans never get the chance to take advantage of. Were still young! We don't have a family, we don't have debt and we can go anywhere.” Her words echoed that of Mr Woods, and they percolated through my mind. I once again had an opportunity to seize the moment, this time as an adult. I vowed to return.
I came back here to touch base, get a read on the country, and go back out again, Like I had done so many times before. When I came back I had fresh eyes, on my own people, on my own nation. Since America is a microcosm of the world, it gave me fresh eyes on the world itself.


I’ve seen our poverty, I’ve seen our abundance, our anger, and our distrust of the government. My own father, reciting the talking points of a nation I didn't recognize. I've come back to touch base, to get a read on my country, and my people. I've decided study at GPS, to gain perspective and context of how our country