REPORT

Reengaging the

Asia-Pacific on Trade: A

TPP Roadmap for the

Next U.S. Administration

Wendy Cutler
Reengaging the

Asia-Pacific on Trade:

A TPP Roadmap for the

Next U.S. Administration

WENDY CUTLER

SEPTEMBER 2020

A REPORT OF THE ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE
With a solution-oriented mandate, the Asia Society Policy Institute (ASPI) tackles major policy challenges

confronting the Asia-Pacific in security, prosperity, sustainability, and the development of common norms and

values for the region. The Asia Society Policy Institute is a think- and do-tank designed to bring forth policy

ideas that incorporate the best thinking from top experts in Asia and to work with policymakers to integrate

these ideas and put them into practice.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Wendy Cutler

is vice president of the Asia Society Policy Institute (ASPI) and the managing director of its

Washington D.C. office. She joined ASPI following an illustrious career of nearly three decades as a diplomat

and negotiator in the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), including serving as Acting Deputy U.S.

Trade Representative. In that capacity, she worked on a range of U.S. trade negotiations and initiatives in the

Asia-Pacific region, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement and the bilateral negotiations with

Japan. She also was the Chief Negotiator to the U.S.-Korea (KORUS) Free Trade Agreement
.

The author would like to thank Andrew Chatzky and Juan Machado for their assistance in the research and

preparation of this report.

The Asia Society Policy Institute and the Asia Society take no institutional positions on matters of public policy

and other issues addressed in the reports and publications they sponsor. All statements of fact and expressions

of opinion contained in this report are the sole responsibility of its authors and may not reflect the views of the

organization and its board, staff, and supporters.

© 2020 The Asia Society. All rights reserved.

New York

725 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10021

+1 212 288 6400

Washington, D.C.

1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 805

Washington, D.C. 20036

+1 202 833 2742

The Asia Society Policy Institute

Web: AsiaSociety.org/Policy-Institute

Twitter: @AsiaPolicy

Facebook: facebook.com/AsiaPolicy

Email: policyinstitute@asiasociety.org

cover

image

:

Workers unload bags of chemicals at a port in Zhangjiagang in China's eastern Jiangsu province on August 7, 2018 - JOHANNES EISELE/

AFP via Getty Images; Employees on the assembly line produce cars in Mazda's "Family" line of vehicles in Haikou, Hainan Province, China on April 6,

2005 -

China Photos/Getty Images.
FOREWORD

4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

6

1.

INTRODUCTION

8

2.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE REGIONAL

10

TRADE LANDSCAPE

U.S. Exit from the TPP

A New Path in the Shadow of TPP

Shift to a Bilateral Approach

Recent Asia-Pacific Trade Trends

3.

OPTIONS FOR U.S. REENGAGEMENT WITH THE

17

CPTPP COUNTRIES

Option 1: Returning to the Original TPP

Option 2: Acceding to the CPTPP

Option 3: Renegotiating the CPTPP

Option 4: Pursuing Interim Sectoral Deals

4.

DOMESTIC AND TRADING PARTNER CONSIDERATIONS

22

The Changing U.S. Views on Trade

The Views of CPTPP Member Countries

5.

A TPP ROAD MAP FOR THE INCOMING U.S.

27

ADMINISTRATION

CONTENTS
4

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

FOREWORD

WHOEVER OCCUPIES THE OVAL OFFICE NEXT YEAR WILL FACE CHALLENGES

that seemed

unimaginable only four years ago. Chief among them will be how to keep the COVID-19 pandemic in

check while steering an economic recovery. However, another challenge that the American president will

have to navigate has been on the horizon for decades—the economic rise of Asia, and China in particular,

coupled with rapid technological innovation, all of which have radically transformed the global economy.

The extent of this transformation will require the next administration to fundamentally rethink the

U.S. economic and strategic relationship with the Asia-Pacific region as a whole. Indeed, in the next few

years, the United States will have to decide how it will engage with this new Asia, just as it had to find its

footing as a global leader in the years leading up to World War II and after the fall of the Soviet Union.

This is not a task for the fainthearted. But thankfully, there is a template that can serve as a baseline,

at least in the trade and economic sphere.

In February 2016, the United States signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement with 11

other countries that together accounted for some 40 percent of the world economy. The agreement, like

any trade deal, was far from perfect. But it established a common set of high-standard trade and invest-

ment rules for the region in areas such as intellectual property protection, e-commerce, market access,

labor, and the environment.

As we all know, President Donald Trump withdrew from the TPP during his first week in office.

But, as this report argues, the TPP framework is still the best bet for the United States to “redefine the

terms of engagement with the region on trade and economic issues.”

This report realistically outlines the main U.S. options for working with the economies that are

members of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP),

which was ultimately concluded without U.S. participation.

In assessing the feasibility of these options, this report draws on one of the Asia Society Policy Insti-

tute’s core strengths: its relationships with top experts in the Asia-Pacific. My colleagues at the Institute,

led by our Vice President, Wendy Cutler (a former Acting U.S. Deputy Trade Representative), spoke to

a dozen current and former trade officials from across the region to understand whether, and under what

conditions, their capitals would welcome U.S. reentry into the CPTPP. This view beyond Washington is

critical, as foreign policy is not conducted in a vacuum absent the perspective of others—something that

is often missing from other commentary in this field.

The report concludes by outlining a road map for how the next administration could reenter the

CPTPP specifically, and how it could structure its reengagement on trade with the Asia-Pacific more

broadly. It addresses the domestic and international challenges facing the next administration as it works

through its own trade policy. At the same time, the report considers how seemingly small initial steps,

such as a sectoral agreement with the CPTPP countries on an important issue such as digital trade, trade
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

5

in medical and other essential products, and trade and the environment/climate, would help reestablish

U.S. leadership in the region and pave the way for the U.S. reentry into the CPTPP.

We hope that the next U.S. administration, whether Republican or Democratic, will find this report

a useful and thought-provoking contribution.

The Honorable Kevin Rudd AC

President, Asia Society Policy Institute

26th Prime Minister of Australia
6

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

IN THE AFTERMATH OF A PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION,

it’s not unusual for an incoming adminis-

tration to revisit policy choices made by the previous administration or, in the case of reelection, during

the first term. One decision that strongly merits another look after November is the U.S. withdrawal

from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a regional trade agreement that the United States signed with

11 other countries in 2016. In addition to eliminating tariffs, the TPP established high-standard rules in

areas critical to the global economy, such as e-commerce, intellectual property protection, state-owned

enterprises, labor, and the environment, promoting an alternative economic model to state-led capitalism

in the region.

In recent years, the case for U.S. participation in the TPP has only become more compelling as the

political and economic importance of the Asia-Pacific region has grown and concerns about Beijing’s

economic model have mounted. East Asia is bouncing back from the COVID-19 pandemic before the

rest of the world, and deepening economic ties with the engines of global growth will be an even more

valuable proposition in the midst of a deep recession. Moreover, the pandemic has revealed serious

vulnerabilities in supply chain networks, and the common standards and rules of the TPP can serve as

the basis for establishing trusted supply chains in the region. But is there a path for the United States to

return to the TPP or to join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership

(CPTPP), which the 11 remaining countries finalized without the United States?

This report examines four options that the next administration would have for reengaging the

CPTPP countries on trade: returning to the original TPP agreement, formally acceding to the CPTPP,

seeking a broader renegotiation with the CPTPP as a baseline, or working on a narrower sectoral deal

as an immediate, interim step. It then assesses the feasibility of each option based on domestic consider-

ations and developments, as well as input from the CPTPP countries.

Domestically, a policy window may be opening for CPTPP reentry. Whereas trade was seen as toxic

only four years ago, recent polls have found growing bipartisan public support for trade. At the same

time, however, the views of the political parties on trade appear to be shifting. Some observers have gone

so far as to suggest that the United States is on the precipice of a new trade order, with Republicans

more protectionist and Democrats friendlier toward trade. This makes the domestic landscape and the

outcome of a congressional trade vote uncertain. The strong bipartisan congressional vote in favor of the

United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) led many to conclude that this agreement should

be the new U.S. template for trade agreements. However, there may be factors unique to the USMCA

that would not be in play in a negotiation with Asian countries. Another complicating factor is the fate

of Trade Promotion Authority, set to expire in July 2021, which is a prerequisite for negotiations in the

view of U.S. trading partners.

The prospect of CPTPP reentry also depends on the extent to which its members would be open

to revisions proposed by the United States. To take the temperature of capitals in Asia, the Asia Society

Policy Institute spoke with a dozen current and former trade officials from a diverse set of CPTPP coun-

tries. Those interviewed unanimously affirmed that they would welcome the United States back, but not

at any cost. They are wary of being asked to make extensive revisions, having been scarred by the U.S.

withdrawal after expending significant political capital during the TPP negotiations. Those countries
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

7

were accustomed to the uncertainties of the congressional approval process, but they now also worry

about the presidential election cycle.

With the foregoing considerations in mind, the report offers a road map for the next administration

to reengage with the CPTPP countries. Recommended steps include the following:

•

Launch an interim sectoral agreement
: As a first step, pursue a limited, sector-specific

Asia-Pacific trade deal with the CPTPP members, and perhaps other countries, to set high

standards, rebuild trust, and build momentum. Promising topics include:

o

Digital trade, an area that represents more and more of overall trade, particularly now

that the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the digitalization of the global economy.

o

Trade in medical and other essential products, a sector in which COVID-19 has

focused attention on trade restrictions and vulnerabilities in global supply chains.

o

Trade and the environment/climate, which may be of particular interest to a Demo-

cratic White House.

•

Invest in competitiveness and adjustment at home
: Build support for trade agreements

generally and the CPTPP specifically at home by investing in competitiveness and adjust-

ment policies and programs. Doing so would take the pressure off trade agreements to

achieve goals they are not designed to tackle, such as ensuring more equitable income

distribution.

•

Make the case for trade
: Explain to the American public that deeper U.S. trade engage-

ment with Asia-Pacific partners is integral to building an alternative economic model to

Chinese state capitalism, diversifying U.S. trade beyond China and, ideally, promoting

reforms within China.

•

Prioritize negotiating proposals
: Develop and prioritize concrete proposals for U.S. reen-

gagement with the CPTPP based on input from business, labor, and civil society groups

throughout the country, as well as Congress.

•

Consult with trading partners
: Consult with the CPTPP members to understand their

limits, priorities, and concerns around U.S. reengagement.

These steps would pIave the way for U.S. reentry into the CPTPP. Even then, CPTPP reengagement

would be a heavy lift that would require flexibility and creativity from both the United States and the

CPTPP countries. Returning to the original TPP by signing on to a five-year-old agreement that faced

considerable opposition at home is not a realistic proposition in 2021. The approach with the best odds of

success would likely fall between formal CPTPP accession and a more extensive renegotiation. For that to

work, the United States would need to focus on the most important changes and modernizations needed,

while the CPTPP countries would need to be more open to changes than during a typical accession.

Given the domestic and international challenges outlined in this report, it is understandable that

many would question whether returning to the CPTPP is worth all the trouble. Despite those concerns,

rejoining the CPTPP is one of the most impactful ways in which the United States can work with like-

minded countries in the region to promote an alternative economic model to state-led capitalism and help

shape the economic future of a region that is increasingly the engine of global growth and innovation.
8

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

1. INTRODUCTION

MANY EXPECTED THE TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP (TPP) TO DIE A QUIET DEATH

after

the United States exited the agreement in the first week of the Donald Trump administration.

That

didn’t happen. Instead, the regional trade deal lives on internationally as the Comprehensive and Progres-

sive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), as well as in numerous provisions of the United

States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) and the U.S.-Japan phase one trade agreement.

Meanwhile, the debate in the United States on whether to reconsider participation in TPP continues.

Critics argue that the TPP was a bad deal. Some say it favored big business and encouraged offshoring to

countries with weak labor standards, while others claim that it failed to prevent currency manipulation

or to sufficiently rein in state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Still others, such as U.S. Trade Representative

Robert Lighthizer, suggest that the TPP wouldn’t boost the U.S. economy much because the United

States already has bilateral free trade agreements with 6

of the 11 other members.

1

TPP

advocates

have

not

gone

quiet,

however.

Support for the TPP remains one of the few areas in

which numerous congressional Republicans openly break

with President Trump. A year after withdrawal, 25 GOP

senators signed an open letter urging President Trump

to reconsider his decision.

2

Senator Chuck Grassley

(R-IA), chair of the Senate Finance Committee, plainly said that TPP withdrawal “was a mistake,”

3

and

Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) admitted that he preferred the TPP to the much narrower U.S.-Japan

phase one deal.

Some Democrats continue to favor it, too, arguing that the TPP would allow the United States to

“play the long game with China,”

4

and they believe, in the words of Representative Ron Kind (D-WI),

that the “decision to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership was a win for farmers, workers, and

businesses . . . in China.”

5

Trump himself has brought up the idea of reconsidering participation.

With 2021 approaching, the topic of TPP may be revisited regardless of the outcome of the

upcoming presidential election. To be clear, TPP is not on the radar of either candidate, and Trump’s

and Biden’s statements on the deal have varied. Trump has lambasted the agreement, repeatedly calling

it a “horrible deal” and making his preference for bilateral agreements known.

6

That said, Trump has

brought up the idea of reconsidering participation. In April 2018, he briefly suggested that the United

States might rejoin.

7

There is nothing to glean from candidate Trump’s stated second-term agenda,

which simply says “Enact Fair Trade Deals that Protect American Jobs.” Democratic nominee Joe Biden

supported the TPP during the Obama administration, and during one of the early primary debates, he

said that he would consider rejoining provided there was a renegotiation.

8

More recently, however, the

former vice president wrote in the spring 2020 edition of

Foreign Affairs

that he would “not enter into

any new trade agreements until we have invested in Americans and equipped them to succeed in the

global economy.”

9

New administrations often take

a fresh look at what can be

accomplished in the coming four

years, and it’s conceivable

that the TPP could make the

list for consideration.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

9

But new administrations often take a fresh look at what can be accomplished in the coming four

years, and it’s conceivable that the TPP could make the list for consideration. Rejoining the TPP would

be challenging, but the case for reengaging with the CPTPP countries in some form has become more

compelling as the political and economic importance of the Asia-Pacific region has grown and concerns

about Beijing’s state-led economic model have mounted. With no end to tensions with China in sight,

there is a growing recognition that the United States would be better off enlisting like-minded countries

to rein in unfair Chinese trade practices and to promote an alternative economic model to state-led capi-

talism, rather than going it alone. To date, U.S. unilateral tariff hikes and export control restrictions have

not led to meaningful Chinese reforms.

With this possibility in mind, this report examines the options on the table for what U.S. reengage-

ment with the CPTPP members could look like. Among the questions it seeks to answer are:

•

Could the United States return to what it signed or sign on to what the other members

agreed to after it left the TPP?

•

In light of U.S. trade policy developments over the past five years, what would be the

scope and magnitude of the updates and revisions the United States might seek?

•

How would CPTPP members respond, particularly if the United States envisioned a

major renegotiation?

•

Are more limited negotiations a more realistic short-term alternative to reengage in the

region?

This report also examines how U.S. trade policy and the global and regional trade landscape have

shifted during the five years since the TPP negotiations were concluded and how views on trade and the

TPP have evolved in the United States and among our key trading partners.

Twenty years ago, Asia accounted for less than a third of global output. Twenty years from now, it

will account for more than half the world’s total economy.

10

Asia is today home to a burgeoning middle

class and to many of the countries and companies that will shape the global economy for years to come.

Regardless of who wins in November, the United States will need to redefine the terms of engagement

with the region on trade and economic issues. The CPTPP can offer an important framework for doing

so. To this end, the report concludes with a road map for how the United States can move forward into

the Asian trading century.
1 0

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

2. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE

REGIONAL TRADE LANDSCAPE

IN THE FIVE YEARS SINCE THE TPP NEGOTIATIONS WERE FINALIZED,

the regional trade land-

scape has changed dramatically.

No single development has been as impactful as the U.S.-China trade

war. In response to Chinese trade practices, the United States hit China with a series of escalating tariffs,

which begat a series of retaliatory tariffs from Beijing. The tariffs slowed trade and overall growth in both

countries, as well as in Japan, Korea and other Asian economies whose trade flows and supply chains

are even more closely linked to China, although the effects were largely masked in the United States by

an economic expansion. The World Trade Organization (WTO) proved unable to mediate. The United

States and China reached a tenuous truce with a “phase

one” trade deal in January 2020, but that agreement left

most tariff increases in place.

Of course, no discussion of the 2020 geopolitical

landscape is complete without mention of COVID-19.

The pandemic has produced economic disruptions that

are expected to reverberate in all corners of the world for

the foreseeable future. Trade flows and supply chains have

been impacted, with global trade volume down by nearly 20 percent in the second quarter of 2020 as a

result of the pandemic.

11

Some countries have introduced or considered inward-looking measures such

as export restrictions and the reshoring of manufacturing as they struggle with the economic fallout of

COVID-19. As of this writing, it’s unclear how these developments will play out, but they will undoubt-

edly have an unprecedented impact on the global economy and trade for years to come.

Beyond U.S-China trade tensions and COVID-19, four other major developments on the Asia-Pa-

cific trade front are germane to this report: (1) the U.S. exit from the original TPP agreement; (2)

the formation of a new CPTPP among the remaining members; (3) the pursuit of a U.S. trade policy

centered around “America First” and bilateral deals; and (4) the continued, steady march of new trade

agreements across the Asia-Pacific region that do not include the United States.

This section describes these key developments before taking a more targeted look at the specific

options for a more active U.S. trade strategy in Asia.

U.S. Exit from the TPP

On January 23, 2017, three days after taking office, President Trump issued an executive order instruct-

ing the United States to withdraw from the TPP. During the campaign, Trump’s anti-trade posture was

prominent, as he criticized existing trade agreements generally and the TPP specifically. He called the

TPP “a continuing rape” of the United States.

12

While candidate Trump’s language was unusually harsh,

he was not alone in his skeptical view of the TPP. Hillary Clinton, despite expressing support for the

negotiation while secretary of state, disavowed the TPP as a candidate, saying that the final agreement

“didn’t meet my standards” of “more new, good jobs for Americans, for rising wages for Americans.”

13

Both candidates seemed to be responding to polls showing that many Americans had soured on trade.

The pandemic has produced

economic disruptions that are

expected to reverberate

in all corners of the world for

the foreseeable future.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

11

The withdrawal put the brakes on U.S. participation in a 12-country agreement whose members

represented nearly 40 percent of global economic output. It included 30 chapters and state-of-the-art rules

on such topics as customs administration, services, technical standards, intellectual property protection,

e-commerce, investment, labor, and the environment. It also provided members with unprecedented access

to each other’s markets by eliminating or lowering tariffs and nontariff barriers across all sectors, including

agriculture. The TPP was envisioned as an open platform that would welcome other participants that could

meet its high standards.

For the remaining 11 TPP signatories, the exit of the United States threw the agreement into

disarray. The loss of the world’s biggest market diminished the TPP’s appeal, collapsing the share of

global gross domestic product (GDP) covered by the deal from 40 percent to 13 percent. “Losing the

United States from the TPP is a big loss, there is no question about that,” said then–Australian prime

minister Malcolm Turnbull.

14

Countries were divided on how to proceed. Australia announced that it

wanted to move forward without the United States but raised

the possibility of including other partners such as Indonesia

and China. Chile said that it would pursue bilateral trade

deals with Beijing instead.

Japan, the largest signatory aside from the United States

and the last to join the negotiation, was especially disappointed. Former prime minister Shinzo Abe had

spent significant political capital on the TPP, taking on powerful agricultural interests and prioritizing

Diet approval of the deal, which took place shortly before the U.S. withdrawal. In the early days after

the U.S. exit, Tokyo seemed disinterested in a deal without Washington. “The TPP would be meaningless

without the United States,” said Abe.

15

He added that the U.S. departure “destroys the basic balance of

gains” from the deal.

16

With time, however, Japan reversed course. Following a bilateral meeting in February 2017, Trump

and Abe released a joint statement noting that Japan was “continuing to advance regional progress on the

basis of existing initiatives.”

17

With this, Japan felt that it had tacit approval from Washington to go ahead

with the TPP without the United States. In March of that year, Chile hosted the remaining TPP members,

as well as South Korea and China, to discuss the pact’s fate. By May, the 11 original TPP members were

determined to move forward among themselves.

A New Path in the Shadow of the TPP

Following months of negotiation, the most crucial discussions took place on the margins of the Novem-

ber 2017 APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) Economic Leaders' Meeting in Da Nang, Vietnam.

At Da Nang, leaders were close to reaching an agreement on what would eventually be called the Com-

prehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, or CPTPP.

Yet, while Japanese, Australian, and Vietnamese leadership pushed the negotiation toward a conclu-

sion, others, particularly Canada, began to drag their feet. Ultimately, the 11 countries regrouped and were

able to work through their remaining differences, including Canada’s concerns that the revised deal did not

go far enough in addressing progressive issues, particularly labor rights.

For the remaining 11

TPP signatories, the exit of

the United States threw the

agreement into disarray.
1 2

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

The CPTPP members surprised skeptics and concluded their revised agreement in March 2018. The

amended agreement put aside some of Washington’s core concerns. While the 11 remaining countries

agreed to keep the market access commitments (on tariffs, services and investment access, government

procurement, and temporary entry) intact, they suspended 22 provisions from the original TPP, a small

fraction of the lengthy and detailed text. These provisions included those that were most important to the

United States and those that had drawn concerns from other countries. Specifically, the changes removed

special data protection for biologic drugs, narrowed the scope of the investment disciplines, and reduced

the term of copyright protection to 50 years, among other things.

At the same time, CPTPP members also made several new procedural adjustments, including terms

for the revised agreement’s entry into force and accession. They also exchanged side letters to address

specific concerns. New Zealand was essentially exempted from the CPTPP’s investor-state dispute

settlement (ISDS) mechanism, and the various digital

trade commitments that Vietnam had made in the

original TPP were weakened. Yet the overwhelming

majority of the TPP provisions, including the elimina-

tion or reduction of tariffs and increased market access,

remained untouched, making the CPTPP one of the

broadest and most state-of-the-art trade agreements

ever signed.

Ratification followed swiftly in Mexico, Japan,

Singapore, New Zealand, Canada, and Australia, and

the CPTPP officially entered into force between those

members in December 2018. Vietnam joined a few

weeks later. Four of the CPTPP members—Brunei, Chile, Malaysia, and Peru—have yet to ratify the deal

and bring it into force. This is largely due to domestic politics, but the U.S. absence most likely made rati-

fication less urgent.

Throughout the renegotiation and ratification process, there was lingering hope that the United States

would return. In April 2018, Trump briefly suggested an openness to rejoining the pact before reversing

course again and saying, without specificity, that he would only be interested “if the deal were substantially

better.”

18

Yet, among the 11 CPTPP countries, rifts had already begun to emerge between members that

wanted the United States to return and those that didn’t want U.S. interests to derail the conclusion of the

CPTPP negotiations. Australian trade minister Steven Ciobo captured the latter sentiment when he said

that he couldn’t see the negotiators “unpicking all the stitching that brought this deal together to accom-

modate the U.S. at this point.”

19

Shift to a Bilateral Approach

The executive order issued by President Trump in January 2017 instructing the United States to withdraw

from the TPP also stated that the United States would seek “to deal directly with individual countries on

a one-on-one (or bilateral) basis in negotiating future trade deals.” By pursuing bilateral deals instead of

regional agreements, the president believed, the United States would have more negotiating leverage and

thus be able to deliver more advantageous and balanced trade deals.

The overwhelming majority of

the TPP provisions, including the

elimination or reduction of tariffs

and increased market access,

remained untouched, making

the CPTPP one of the broadest

and most state-of-the-art trade

agreements ever signed.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

13

While the CPTPP was moving forward, the Trump administration focused on renegotiating two

existing U.S. free trade agreements that the president had singled out as particularly unsatisfactory, again

without specificity. First, South Korea agreed to make modest improvements, largely in the automotive

sector, to the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS) that had entered into force in 2012. The

revisions to KORUS did not require congressional approval. The White House also turned its attention

to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which entered into force in 1994 and which

Trump decried during the 2016 campaign. NAFTA 2.0, rebranded the United States-Mexico-Canada

Agreement, or USMCA, involved long and tense negotiations and borrowed heavily from the TPP.

Bruce Heyman, former U.S. ambassador to Canada,

estimated that two-thirds of the USMCA borrowed

language directly from the TPP, and a separate study

found that the USMCA copied 57 percent of its text

from the TPP.

20

The USMCA also updated a number of TPP

provisions. In the new digital trade chapter, absent

from the original NAFTA, the USMCA borrowed

from the TPP’s e-commerce chapter but also strength-

ened some commitments, expanded coverage, and

deleted carve-outs. For example, it liberalized data

localization

requirements

for

financial

services,

banned forced turnover of underlying algorithms,

and endorsed APEC cross-border privacy rules as an authorized means for data transfer. Other TPP

provisions updated in the USMCA included the promotion of science-based rules for sanitary and

phytosanitary measures and removal of technical barriers to trade.

The USMCA also added new features that were controversial not only with Mexico and Canada but

among U.S. stakeholders as well. These included stricter automotive rules of origin to qualify for duty-

free treatment among the three parties, limitations on any of the parties subsequently entering into free

trade agreements with nonmarket economies (widely understood to mean China), and a so-called sunset

provision for the agreement to lapse after 16 years unless all three parties agreed to extend it. The U.S.

business community labeled some of these unconventional additions “poison pills.”

Also, determined to secure the agriculture market access from Japan that Tokyo had provided to

other CPTPP partners, U.S. negotiators cajoled Japan into negotiating a partial “phase one” bilateral

agreement focused on agriculture and digital commerce, which was signed in October 2019. That, too,

borrowed heavily from the TPP, obtaining most of the Japanese agriculture market access provided by

the TPP, with the notable exceptions of rice and certain dairy products, and including a “gold standard”

digital trade chapter akin to the USMCA’s.

Recent Asia-Pacific Trade Trends

The trade developments discussed previously are either directly or indirectly related to the Trump admin-

istration’s decision to steer clear of the TPP. But much has transpired in the Asian trade landscape in

recent years independent of the United States: the possibility of new countries acceding to the CPTPP,

Much has transpired in the

Asian trade landscape in recent

years independent of the United

States: the possibility of new

countries acceding to the CPTPP
,

continued momentum toward

concluding trade-liberalizing

agreements... and the emergence

of sector-specific agreements.
1 4

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

continued momentum toward concluding trade-liberalizing agreements despite the reverse trend occur-

ring elsewhere, and the emergence of sector-specific agreements.

Accessions to the CPTPP

Efforts by the CPTPP countries to attract accession partners have yet to materialize. A number of econ-

omies have expressed varying degrees of interest, including Colombia, Indonesia, the Philippines, South

Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and the United Kingdom. However, none to date has officially thrown a hat in

the ring and triggered the accession procedures.

The United Kingdom and Thailand seem the most viable accession candidates as of this writing.

Despite being a world away from the Pacific, the United Kingdom seems closest to an official decision

on accession. Secretary of State for International Trade Liz Truss said that London was “working with

CPTPP countries to secure our accession” and framed British interest in both economic and geostrategic

terms.

21

In September 2020, the UK held talks with the 11 CPTPP members about possible accession

and separately announced an agreement in principle with Japan on a bilateral trade deal, characterizing

it as “an important step towards joining the [CPTPP].”

22

The UK is also pursuing bilateral agreements

with three other CPTPP members: Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. If successfully concluded, the

negotiations could further pave the way for a smooth

CPTPP accession.

Thailand has also expressed interest in acceding

to the CPTPP. The Thai deputy prime minister told

Japanese officials that Thailand would join “as soon as

possible” in May 2018,

23

and Thai officials have spoken

favorably of the CPTPP throughout 2020. Japan is

particularly interested in Thai accession, given the close supply chain integration between Japanese and

Thai firms. Nevertheless, domestic concerns have presented obstacles. In particular, many in Thailand

have grown skeptical of free trade agreements since the Thai government rammed through several free

trade agreements in the early 2000s without much public input.

China has also raised its interest in the CPTPP privately and publicly in recent years. Most recently,

in June 2020, Premier Li Keqiang stated during the National People’s Congress that China “has a positive

and open attitude toward joining CPTPP.”

24

This was the first time China’s leadership had expressed

such interest publicly. From Beijing’s perspective, accession would allow China to further integrate its

economy with others in the region while also reducing its reliance on the U.S. market and its vulnera-

bility to U.S. tariffs and other forms of retaliation. For Communist Party leaders, replacing the United

States in its signature Asian trade deal would also represent a major public relations coup.

Other CPTPP countries are unsure of what to make of Beijing’s interest. China is a major trading

partner of virtually every country in the Asia-Pacific region. For many CPTPP members, two-way trade

with China has surpassed two-way trade with the United States. That said, China would have a long way

to go to demonstrate its CPTPP “readiness,” particularly with respect to digital trade, labor, and SOEs,

and at a time of growing global concern about whether China has fully adhered to both the spirit and the

letter of the commitments it made when it joined the WTO.

The CPTPP is not the only game

in town. Many countries in the

Asia-Pacific region have stepped

up their trade agreement

activity in recent years.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

15

Trade Activity in the Asia-Pacific Region: Full Steam Ahead

The CPTPP is not the only game in town. Many countries in the Asia-Pacific region have stepped up

their trade agreement activity in recent years. This phenomenon is due to several factors, including the

desire to grow their economies, create jobs, attract foreign direct investment, diversify their trading part-

ners, and demonstrate that trade liberalization, not protectionism, is the preferred path to follow. In

addition, economies that are not plausible near-term candidates for CPTPP accession want to show that

they are not being left behind in the push for greater regional integration.

The other major regional trade agreement, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership

(RCEP), under negotiation since 2012, appears to be on track for signature in November 2020 despite

India’s decision not to join. The remaining 15 members would account for roughly 30 percent of the

world’s population and GDP. If India were to return, both numbers would rise significantly. Overall, the

RCEP is less ambitious than the CPTPP with respect to market access (including tariffs) and trade and

investment “rules.” That said, certain chapters, such as e-commerce, may go further than expected.

Beyond regional deals, countries across the Asia-Pacific region have also moved ahead on the bilat-

eral front with several agreements. Just within the past few months, the Indonesia-Australia Compre-

CPTPP

RCEP

CPTPP & RCEP

SOUTH KOREA

MALAYSIA

AUSTRALIA

VIETNAM

PHILIPPINES

JAPAN

LAOS

SINGAPORE

INDONESIA

THAILAND

CAMBODIA

MYANMAR

CHINA

NEW ZEALAND

CANADA

PERU

MEXICO

CHILE

BRUNEI

CPTPP AND RCEP MEMBERSHIP
1 6

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

hensive Economic Partnership Agreement (July 2020) and the European Union (EU)-Vietnam Free

Trade Agreement (August 2020) entered into force, as did updates to the ASEAN-Japan Comprehensive

Economic Partnership Agreement (August 2020). South Korea also wrapped up negotiations on a free

trade agreement with Indonesia in November 2019, and both are now working to ratify the deal.

The EU’s renewed pursuit of trade deals in the region is notable as well. The EU concluded the

Economic Partnership Agreement with Japan in July 2018, establishing the world’s largest bilateral trade

agreement. The EU also concluded agreements with Singapore in 2018 and with Vietnam in 2020.

Long-running negotiations with ASEAN and certain individual ASEAN members are in various stages,

along with more recent negotiations with Australia and New Zealand.

Digital Trade Pacts

Sectoral negotiations are also cropping up in the region. Nowhere is this more evident than in the digital

space, a fast-evolving area of international commerce. In June 2020, Chile, New Zealand, and Singapore

signed the Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA). Singapore also concluded a bilateral digital

agreement with Australia in March 2020, and Singapore

and South Korea recently launched negotiations.

All of these agreements go beyond the CPTPP

provisions and include rules for nondiscriminatory treat-

ment of electronic transactions, easing of restrictions on

cross-border data flows, and various consumer protections. DEPA, for example, adds trade facilitation

provisions in areas such as e-payments and e-invoicing, and it adds cooperation clauses regarding new

and emerging technologies, including fintech and artificial intelligence.

25

DEPA is novel with respect to

its approach to new members. It provides an avenue for joining the pact in a piecemeal fashion in which

countries can accept only some of its modules.

Of course, Asian countries, including China, are also participating in the WTO e-commerce pluri-

lateral negotiations, involving approximately 80 WTO members.

Sectoral negotiations are also

cropping up in the region.

Nowhere is this more evident

than in the digital space
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

17

3. OPTIONS FOR U.S. REENGAGEMENT WITH

THE CPTPP COUNTRIES

THESE DEVELOPMENTS OVER THE PAST FIVE YEARS HAVE SHAPED

the next administration’s

options for reengaging with the TPP/CPTPP members. Should it choose to do so, the United States

would have four basic paths: (1) returning to the original TPP agreement; (2) acceding to the CPTPP;

(3) seeking a broader renegotiation; or (4) pursuing a narrower sectoral agreement as a first step. In this

section, we discuss these options, which are not entirely mutually exclusive, and evaluate their feasibility.

Option 1: Returning to the Original TPP

On the surface, the most obvious option would be for the United States to express its interest in return-

ing to the original TPP agreement that it signed with the 11 other countries in February 2016. This

option has serious shortcomings. First, it’s unlikely the CPTPP members would be willing to go back to

the original TPP text. These countries had substantive concerns about the suspended provisions, partic-

ularly those in the intellectual property rights (IPR), and investment chapters. Additionally, they would

be reluctant to redo their domestic approval process, which makes for contentious political debates and

requires significant political capital. In their view, that ship has sailed.

This option also presents roadblocks from the U.S. perspective. Turning the clock back to a trade

deal that concluded in 2015 and faced considerable opposition, including from the two 2016 U.S. presi-

dential candidates, would be extremely challenging in 2021. The trade landscape has also shifted dramat-

ically over the past five years, and it’s questionable whether any U.S. administration would still consider

the 22 suspended provisions as desirable, let alone worth fighting for at this point. In the USMCA, for

instance, the Trump administration decided not to push for the special multiyear protection term for

biologic drugs, one of the most contentious issues advanced by the U.S. negotiators in the TPP and one

of the first provisions the remaining 11 members cast aside when the United States withdrew.

Option 2: Acceding to the CPTPP

A second option would be for the United States to express its formal interest in acceding to the CPTPP.

This option is likely to be met with the greatest support by the CPTPP members because it would not

require them to enter into new negotiations, and it would affirm their decision not to abandon the deal.

However, it is fraught with difficulties from the U.S. perspective.

First, in accession negotiations, existing members typically hold the cards since it’s up to them to

give the thumbs up or thumbs down to the accession candidate’s proposals. With the U.S. economy

eclipsing the combined GDP of the other 11 countries by over 50 percent, the United States would not

likely be interested in such a subordinate role. Moreover, accession negotiations by definition focus on

signing on to what’s already been agreed to by others and keeping adjustments, exceptions, and transi-

tion periods to a minimum. It’s not clear that the United States could agree to this limitation.

Furthermore, the CPTPP agreement as ratified reflects some, but far from all, of the evolutions

in U.S. trade policy over the past five years. For example, the new automotive rules of origin in the
1 8

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

USMCA are far more restrictive than those in the CPTPP. It’s hard to see the CPTPP countries, partic-

ularly Japan, agreeing to these requirements.

Finally, congressional approval would be an uphill battle. We will never know whether the original

TPP agreement would have secured congressional approval. However, it’s indisputable that it lacked

strong bipartisan congressional and public support, and the participation of some members, such as

Japan and Vietnam, drew active opposition from some

U.S. trade stakeholders. Has that reality changed in the

past five years? It’s far from certain.

Of course, it’s more than likely that with U.S. acces-

sion on the table—a priority for existing members—the

CPTPP countries would be somewhat more open to

updates and revisions than with other potential acces-

sion partners. This is particularly true for the rules part

of the agreement, as opposed to each country’s market access commitments, where some countries may

go to great lengths to avoid reopening the intricate and domestically sensitive web of tariff concessions.

Option 3: Renegotiating the CPTPP

In light of the difficulties of returning to the original TPP or acceding to the CPTPP, the United States

could propose a major renegotiation. This approach would help restore the United States to its historical

leadership role in trade negotiations. It would also allow it to fully leverage its market size in the negoti-

ations and to push for more extensive revisions and updates than accession would permit. These updates

could include the following:

•

Modernizing provisions in such areas as digital trade, customs, and IPR

•

Deleting commitments that may no longer represent U.S. priorities, such as the ISDS

mechanism, or weakening others, such as government procurement

•

Revising or adding new provisions to reflect the evolution in U.S. trade policy, including

but not limited to the USMCA provisions on rules of origin, labor, environment, and

currency manipulation

•

Adjusting market access commitments on goods and services

This option could also open the door for other accession candidates, such as South Korea, to join

the negotiation with the United States at the outset. Under this option, they, too, would have more

leeway to help shape the rules, rather than largely accepting the existing CPTPP provisions.

While welcoming U.S. reengagement, current CPTPP members are likely to be wary of such an

ambitious endeavor. This not only would be time-consuming, it also could present domestic difficulties

by raising controversial issues. Furthermore, many are still scarred by their TPP experience with the

United States. Being asked again to make difficult decisions with no assurance of congressional approval,

and no guarantee that the next administration would keep the deal intact, may be a bridge too far.

CPTPP leaders would likely be criticized for both having an unwarranted faith in U.S. intentions, and

for “paying twice” for U.S. economic engagement in the region.

In accession negotiations,

existing members typically

hold the cards since it’s up to

them to give the thumbs up or

thumbs down to the accession

candidate’s proposals.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

19

Such criticism would be especially acute in countries that already have bilateral free trade agreements

with the United States and would receive little new market access from U.S. entry into the CPTPP. That

said, if a renegotiation is the price for U.S. economic reengagement in the Asia-Pacific, it may still receive

support at the highest political levels across the region. Some assurances, including an agreed and finite

set of focus areas for renegotiation, concrete demonstrations of congressional bipartisan support, and/or

a provision in the implementing legislation requiring congressional approval for withdrawal, could make

a renegotiation more enticing.

Option 4: Pursuing Interim Sectoral Deals

A fourth option would be to start more modestly by launching negotiations with the CPTPP countries

on an important or emerging sector, such as digital trade, trade in medical and other essential products,

or the trade and the environment/climate, before entering into more comprehensive negotiations. While

many CPTPP countries might prefer an all-in posture by the United States, they may also be receptive to

a more limited, piecemeal option, depending on the specific subject area.

This approach would allow Washington to gradually rebuild trust and to demonstrate its commit-

ment to renewed engagement in the region. A sectoral agreement could also build on work that the

United States is already undertaking with some of the CPTPP countries within APEC, the G-20, and

the WTO and conclude in a shorter period than the many years typically required for negotiation of a

broader agreement. Furthermore, assuming no changes

to U.S. law are necessary, these deals could be concluded

through executive agreements, requiring congressio-

nal consultation but avoiding a politically fraught and

time-consuming congressional vote.

Finally, a sectoral deal need not be limited to the

United States and existing CPTPP countries. It would

also provide an opportunity for those that have shown

serious interest in CPTPP accession, including the United Kingdom, Thailand, South Korea, and other

Southeast Asian countries, to engage in negotiations that could eventually lead to accession talks.

This option, however, also presents challenges. First, agreeing on a topic for negotiation would not

be easy. While the United States will have its priorities, others will have their own wish lists. Second,

such an approach does not lend itself to trade-offs in the negotiations, which proved instrumental in

getting the TPP countries to agree to U.S. proposals in such areas as IPR, labor, and the environment

in the original negotiations. Finally, it raises concerns on whether such an agreement would meet the

WTO requirements that it cover “substantially all the trade” between the parties and include “substan-

tial sectoral coverage.” Nevertheless, each of these challenges might be easier to surmount than some

of the challenges the other options present. On the WTO question, for example, a sectoral agreement

would arguably meet WTO standards if it is the starting point for a more comprehensive deal down

the road.

As negotiations proceed on a specific subject area, the United States could use that valuable time

to build domestic support for a more ambitious regional agreement. There is no question that the gains

As negotiations proceed on a

specific subject area, the

United States could use that

valuable time to build domestic

support for a more ambitious

regional agreement.
2 0

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

from trade accrue unevenly. The inadequacy of Trade Adjustment Assistance and other programs to

mitigate those uneven gains likely contributed to the visceral anti-trade nature of the 2016 campaign.

The United States could, with time, build up its ability to help Americans adjust to import compe-

tition by developing more robust, flexible, and better funded safety net and worker adjustment programs

and implementing more coherent and focused measures around domestic competitiveness, innovation,

and workforce development. Additionally, the next White House should make a stronger case to the

public for the benefits of trade, and, in particular, connect trade and foreign direct investment to the

creation of well-paying jobs.

Through extensive consultations with Congress and stakeholders across the country, the United

States could also develop its vision of what a regional agreement should look like, taking into consid-

eration the developments over the past five years. As it consults domestically, the United States would

benefit from seeking the early input of trading partners to understand their priorities and concerns, as

well as their bandwidth for working with specific new U.S. ideas.

Possible Areas for Negotiation

Digital trade

is a promising candidate for an issue-specific agreement. This is not a new idea. A 2017

Asia Society Policy Institute report coauthored by former trade officials from the Asia-Pacific region

suggested pursuing a regional digital trade agreement.

26

The case for such an agreement has only grown

as digital trade makes up a increasing share of overall trade. According to the WTO, digital technologies

such as the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, 3D printing, and blockchain will further lower

trade costs and help boost trade by 34 percent by 2030.

27

Digital trade and e-commerce have also served as gate-

ways for small and medium-sized enterprises to partici-

pate in the international trading system. More recently,

the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the digitaliza-

tion of the global economy with respect to trade in both

goods and services, with no turning back.

Furthermore, the CPTPP members and the United

States have both demonstrated leadership in digital

trade in recent years. As described earlier in the report,

regional activity in this sector has proliferated, building on the TPP’s focus on digital trade and e-com-

merce. Members of the CPTPP, particularly Singapore, New Zealand, and Japan, have negotiated ambi-

tious digital trade agreements, and their experience would be essential in facilitating a sectoral agreement.

Furthermore, the United States negotiated cutting-edge digital trade provisions with Canada and Mexico

in the USMCA and with Japan in its phase one trade agreement.

Another topic of increasing interest is

trade in medical and other essential products
. The

COVID-19 pandemic has focused attention on vulnerabilities in global supply chains, particularly for

medical supplies and equipment, as well as certain medicines and key ingredients. A negotiation in

this area could focus on building trusted regional supply chains with like-minded CPTPP countries,

featuring provisions on trade facilitation, export restrictions, services, government procurement, invest-

Members of the CPTPP
,

particularly Singapore, New

Zealand, and Japan, have

negotiated ambitious digital

trade agreements, and their

experience would be essential in

facilitating a sectoral agreement.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

21

ment, and market access, while addressing new challenges such as incentives for onshoring and domestic

stockpiling.

The environment/climate

is a third option. Such a negotiation could include some of the updates

the USMCA made to the CPTPP environment chapter, including requirements for environmental

impact assessment, commitments to provide data on air quality and to protect marine environments, and

specification of the multilateral environmental agreements to which signatories must adhere. Other addi-

tions could include climate change-related provisions, including references to the Paris Agreement and

curbing fossil fuel subsidies, rules around the imposition of carbon tariffs, as well as improved market

access for environmental goods, services, and technologies.
2 2

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

4. DOMESTIC AND TRADING PARTNER

CONSIDERATIONS

ANY POTENTIAL U.S. REENGAGEMENT WITH THE MEMBERS OF THE CPTPP

will be shaped

by the domestic political environment and the receptivity of trading partners to U.S. interests. In assess-

ing the foregoing options, it’s important to carefully consider these two factors.

The Changing U.S. Views on Trade

Recent U.S. polling suggests the American public has warmed to trade. As of February 2020, Gallup

found that 8 in 10 American adults believe that trade represents an opportunity for economic growth.

28

That represents a marked shift from as recently as 2012, when respondents were evenly split on whether

trade was more of an opportunity or a threat. A 2019 NBC News/
Wall Street Journal

survey found that

two-thirds of Americans agreed with the statement “free trade is good for America.”

29

Other recent polls

from the Chicago Council on Global Affairs and the Pew Research Center found Americans growing

similarly bullish on trade.

30, 31

Moreover, the February 2020 Gallup poll found that “trade enjoys strong bipartisan support.” A

majority of respondents from both political parties now support trade. Surprisingly, Democrats (82

percent) are slightly more likely than Republicans (78 percent) to say that trade is an opportunity for

growth. This is a reversal from the last few decades, when Republicans espoused more pro-business

% OF RESPONDENTS

AMERICAN VIEWS OF WHAT FOREIGN TRADE MEANS FOR THE U.S.

1992

2000

2003

2006

2011

2014

2017

2020

80

100

60

40

20

0

Opportunity for economic growth

What do you think foreign trade means for America? Do you see foreign trade more as an opportunity for economic

growth through increased U.S. exports or a threat to the economy?

Threat to the economy

Source: Gallup, February 2020
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

23

and pro-market views, while Democrats have been more skeptical of free trade due to concerns over

the impact on U.S. labor. Time will tell whether this reversal represents a fundamental policy shift or

whether some Democrats are voicing support for trade to distance themselves from Trump’s trade policy.

As the U.S. public changes its views on trade, some have suggested we are on the precipice of a

new trade order, with Republicans more protectionist and Democrats friendlier toward trade. Many

Republicans on the Hill have supported President Trump’s trade agenda. A new group of Republicans,

including Senators Josh Hawley (MO) and Tom Cotton (AR), have advocated for a more populist and

labor-friendly trade position and for onshoring of U.S. innovation and manufacturing.
32

Senator Hawley

has gone so far as to introduce a congressional resolution to withdraw from the WTO. And, almost

universally, Republicans fell in line with President Trump’s demand to drop the ISDS provisions from

the USMCA, even though they were a Republican priority in previous trade talks. On the other side

of the aisle, several of the 2020 Democratic presidential

candidates, including Joe Biden, openly supported the

TPP at various points.

33

Despite the examples cited here, public opinion on

trade policy appears to have shifted more quickly than

the views of elected officials in Congress, leaving each

party somewhat misaligned with the emerging views of

its supporters. Such uncertainty weighs on policy, making it difficult to gauge congressional support for

new trade agreements and congressional views on specific provisions in such deals. This will become an

important consideration if the next administration moves forward with a comprehensive trade agree-

ment, which would require congressional approval.

USMCA: A Template or an Aberration?

The most recent trade agreement submitted to Congress, the USMCA, received strong bipartisan con-

gressional support at a time of historic division in U.S. politics. It passed the House of Representatives

with a vote count of 385–41, and the Senate approved it 89–10. The Trump administration worked

closely with congressional Democrats to address their concerns about labor enforcement, the environ-

ment, and pharmaceuticals, paving the way for such strong support. As a result, there is a growing chorus

urging that the USMCA become the new U.S. template for trade deals.

Yet the USMCA vote does not imply that securing congressional approval for trade deals is now

easy. The bipartisan vote may have resulted from factors specific to the USMCA negotiations, as opposed

to marking a new dawn of bipartisan trade support. With 25 years of NAFTA having shaped North

American production and trade, President Trump seized on unique leverage with Congress by threaten-

ing a costly, disruptive U.S. withdrawal from the original NAFTA if the USMCA was not approved. This

tactic strong-armed some congressional and business skeptics into finding a way to support the USMCA.

Moreover, Canadian and Mexican dependence on the American market—three-quarters of their exports

are destined for the United States—gave U.S. negotiators a strong hand in the negotiations. It’s an open

question as to whether the contents of the deal, and the tactics that went into its negotiation, are appli-

cable to future trade agreements, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region, where China, and not the United

States, is the largest trading partner of most countries.

Some have suggested we are

on the precipice of a new trade

order, with Republicans more

protectionist and Democrats

friendlier toward trade.
2 4

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

Whither TPA?

An additional uncertainty is the fate of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), legislation that provides

authority to the executive branch to negotiate trade agreements and then hold an up-or-down votes on

those agreements. In practice, TPA does not prevent Congress from seeking changes to deals after their

conclusion, as it did with the USMCA, but it is still valued by U.S. trading partners as an assurance that

any changes would be minimal. Conversely, some U.S. trading partners are reluctant to negotiate end-

game issues with a U.S. administration that does not already possess TPA; the TPP negotiation did not

conclude until a few months after Congress approved TPA in May 2015.

The existing TPA will expire on July 1, 2021. This means that the next administration—be it a

second Trump term or a Biden White House—will need to decide whether to seek to its reauthorization

or let it lapse. Congressional trade votes are never easy, and TPA votes, which are more about abstract

legislative procedures than actual, concrete benefits that a specific trade agreement may bring to constit-

uents, have been even more difficult to push through Congress.

Moreover, a TPA vote would be a low priority in the first half of 2021. The next U.S. adminis-

tration will rightly be focused on economic recovery and other domestic priorities stemming from the

COVID-19 pandemic. Without TPA, it’s doubtful that the 11 CPTPP countries would seriously engage

with the United States on rejoining the agreement—which would require congressional approval—

making smaller or sectoral deals that could be implemented through executive agreements a more attrac-

tive course of action in the short term.

0
0

100,000

200,000

300,000

400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000

400,000

300,000

200,000

100,000

Source: World Bank, 2018 data in millions of USD

TWO-WAY TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES

TWO-WAY TRADE WITH CHINA

Australia

Canada

Japan

Mexico

New Zealand

Singapore

Vietnam

TRADE TIES TO THE U.S. VS. CHINA FOR RELEVANT COUNTRIES
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

25

The Views of CPTPP Member Countries

It’s also vital for the United States to consider the views of foreign trading partners, particularly the seven

members of the CPTPP that have implemented the agreement and therefore will decide on accession

candidates. To reengage with the CPTPP, the United States would need to negotiate with those countries,

many of which have deep-seated memories not only of the U.S. decision to withdraw from the original

TPP in 2017 but of how that development followed an eight-year TPP negotiation process that was

largely shaped around U.S. needs and demands.

This section provides the key takeaways from interviews conducted during the summer of 2020

with a dozen former trade officials from a diverse set of CPTPP member countries who were involved at

some point in the TPP or CPTPP negotiations. Although they were not necessarily aligned on specific

negotiating issues, they nevertheless agreed on several key points about a potential U.S. engagement with

the CPTPP.

They Welcome a U.S. Return . . .

It could not be clearer: CPTPP members would welcome the United States back to the regional agree-

ment. “We would have never supported the CPTPP if there hadn’t been a clear path for the U.S. to

return,” one former TPP negotiator said. Trade officials interviewed pointed to both economic and geo-

strategic reasons for supporting U.S. reentry. Having the United States back in the CPTPP would give

the agreement a “stronger sense of purpose.” Others sug-

gested that a U.S. return could provide the impetus for

the remaining four CPTPP members to ratify the deal.

There was uniform belief among the interviewees

that U.S. participation in the CPTPP would provide

momentum for the possible accession of other candidates. Most admitted that the accession process was

stuck, with hopes for early accession by Thailand, South Korea, and the United Kingdom not having

materialized. The United States, with its large market, as well as the geostrategic and economic heft it

would bring to the table, could unlock the accession process for others. A few opined that U.S. reentry

might complicate the accession process for others but that this “would be a welcome complication.”

. . . But Not at Any Cost

Just as there was uniform support for a U.S. return, interviewees were unanimous in noting that member

countries would have limits on the magnitude and scope of revisions and updates they could bear. One

official said that while CPTPP member countries would welcome the United States back, it “depends on

which U.S. wants [to come] back.” Another interviewee added that members want a “reasonable” United

States. “If the U.S. is seeking a disruptive zero-sum game, we need to avoid this by all means,” offered

another official.

Interviewees urged the United States to be “targeted” and “strategic” in determining which revisions

to seek. Another interviewee urged that “in coming back to the TPP, the U.S. should realize that it took a

lot of effort and political capital for the 11 parties to strike a negotiated balance for a second time,” and

It could not be clearer: CPTPP

members would welcome

the United States back to the

regional agreement.
2 6

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

therefore it should be “realistic in its ambition.” One interviewee said that his country’s biggest concern

would be that the United States would be “too demanding, resulting in a protracted negotiation.” For

this to work, the negotiation “must be concluded quickly.”

U.S. Reliability

A number of interviewees raised concerns about the reliability of the United States as a negotiating

partner, particularly Washington’s ability to obtain congressional approval for negotiated commitments.

Some of the interviewees called the TPA a “prerequisite”

for serious negotiations.

Capitals in the Asia-Pacific region were accustomed

to the uncertainties of the U.S. congressional approval

process, but now they are also worried about the execu-

tive branch and the four-year presidential election cycle.

This realization didn’t stop interviewees from positively

discussing a U.S. return, but it made them less open to

major revisions of the agreement. Such revisions would

require them to expend serious political capital without

a guarantee that a future U.S. president would not pull

out of the deal, as Trump did with the TPP. One interviewee said that “evidence of strong bipartisan

support” would be critical before moving forward.

USMCA: Some Parts Welcome, Others Not

When asked about their views on the USMCA as a basis for CPTPP revisions, interviewees had strong

views. Most were open to the trade-liberalizing aspects of the USMCA, particularly those that largely

updated current CPTPP chapters. However, most made it clear that their governments would have diffi-

culty embracing what they considered to be trade-restrictive revisions.

In particular, they expressed concerns about three distinct USMCA areas: strengthened labor enforce-

ment, stronger automotive rules of origin, and the provision on future trade agreements with nonmarket

economies. One interviewee shared that there may be an opening to rethink portions of the labor chapter

in light of the workforce challenges and adjustments associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. One

interviewee pointed to the USMCA’s government procurement outcome as “CPTPP-minus.”

What to Make of China’s Interest?

Interviewees were skeptical that China was serious or ready for CPTPP accession anytime soon, despite

recent statements and overtures from Beijing. Officials pointed to digital, labor, and SOE provisions as

serious obstacles to Chinese accession. Some said that they wanted to keep the door open for China down

the road, but they recognized that in today’s environment, moving ahead with China’s accession would

probably be a death knell for U.S. interest. A couple of interviewees were negative about that prospect

unless and until China “fundamentally changed its economic model.”

Capitals in the Asia-Pacific

region were accustomed to the

uncertainties of the U.S.

congressional approval process,

but now they are also worried

about the executive branch

and the four-year presidential

election cycle.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

27

5. A TPP ROAD MAP FOR THE INCOMING

ADMINISTRATION

NEGOTIATING AND TAKING ON CONGRESSIONAL BATTLES

over a major new trade agreement

will not be an immediate priority for the incoming administration, whatever the outcome of the election.

The White House will have its hands full fighting the COVID-19 pandemic and pursuing economic

recovery. Depending on the outcome of the election, regaining U.S. competitiveness through an ambi-

tious domestic agenda could also take priority. The wishful thinking of some U.S. trade observers not-

withstanding, even a Biden victory would not turn the TPP clock back to December 2016.

The United States may not be ready for or interested in a comprehensive regional agreement based

on the TPP at this point, but that does not mean that U.S. trade engagement in the region should be

put on hold. In fact, the United States should redouble its efforts. With digital trade, the COVID-19

pandemic, and other trends fundamentally reshaping the global economy, now is not the time to stay on

the sidelines. East Asia is bouncing back from the COVID-19 pandemic before the rest of the world, and

deepening economic ties with the engines of global growth will be an even more valuable proposition in

the midst of a deep recession. The pandemic has also highlighted serious vulnerabilities in supply chain

networks, and the shared standards and norms, including common rules of origin, of the CTPP can

serve as the basis for establishing trusted supply chains in the region. At the same time, public attitudes

on trade might have shifted enough to open a policy window for reengaging the Asia-Pacific region,

especially if it is framed as a chance for the United States to work together with allies and partners to

stand up to unfair Chinese practices.

Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, June 2020 update
*

Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam

10

7.5

5

2.5

0

-2.5

-5

-7.5

-10

2020-2021 GDP GROWTH PROJECTION FOR SELECT COUNTRIES AND REGIONS

–10.2

6.0

4.5

–8.0

8.2

1.0
2020
2020
2021
2021

–5.8

2.4

–2.0

6.2

EURO AREA
ASEAN 5
*
JAPAN
CHINA
UNITED STATES
2020
2020
2020
2021
2021
2021

PROJECTED REAL GROWTH RATE (%)
2 8

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

With these options and considerations in mind, the next administration should:

•

As a first and immediate step, pursue a limited, sector-specific regional Asia-Pacific trade

deal with CPTPP members (and other interested regional partners) to set high standards,

rebuild trust, and build momentum. A road map for reengaging with the CPTPP should

start with an agreement on a timely and forward-looking issue, such as digital trade, trade

in medical and other essential products, or trade and the environment/climate.

Meanwhile, the next administration should take these steps domestically:

•

Invest in competitiveness and adjustment measures, including more robust worker transi-

tion support and skills training, to take the pressure off trade agreements to achieve goals

they are not designed to tackle, such as ensuring more equitable income distribution.

•

Consult extensively with stakeholders across the country, including business, labor, and

environmental groups, as well as Congress, to seek input on what future U.S. participa-

tion in the CPTPP should look like.

•

Make a strong case to the American people that trade is one of the most important

avenues to grow a developed economy and that trade agreements can lead to high-paying

jobs generated by exports and foreign direct investment.

•

Explain to the American public that deeper U.S. trade engagement with its Asia-Pacific

partners is integral to the goals of diversifying U.S. trade in the region beyond China and

promoting an alternative economic model to Chinese state capitalism. Ideally, that alter-

native model would also push Beijing to make reforms and further open its market.

And, abroad, the next administration should take these steps:

•

Take the temperature of CPTPP partners to understand their limits, priorities, and

concerns around U.S. reengagement. In particular, Japan and Australia should be viewed

as a key strategic partners in the U.S. efforts to reintegrate into the CPTPP.

•

Increase engagement on trade and economic matters by working more closely with

CPTPP countries within APEC, the G-20, and the WTO.

Finally, based on input from the foregoing steps, the next administration should develop concrete

proposals for U.S. reengagement in the CPTPP within the first year of the term. Altogether, these steps

will lay the groundwork for a possible U.S. reentry into the CPTPP in the future and for greater engage-

ment on trade more broadly with the Asia-Pacific region and with other major trading partners, such

as the EU. Even then, CPTPP reengagement would be a heavy lift that would require flexibility and

creativity from both the United States and the CPTPP countries. The model with the best odds of

success would likely be a hybrid of formal accession (option 2) and extensive renegotiation (option 3).

For that to work, the United States would need to limit its requests to the most important changes and

modernizations required, while the CPTPP countries would need to be more open to changes than

a typical accession would permit. Creative arrangements, such as packaging the more extensive U.S.

proposed revisions and updates in an addendum or side letters that each country would have the option

to sign on to, could help bridge the gaps during the negotiation.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

29

Many would question whether revisiting the CPTPP is worth it, particularly in light of the previous

domestic opposition to the agreement and the numerous challenges outlined above. Yet, with trade

driving so much of economic growth and regional economic alignment, rejoining the CPTPP is one of

the most impactful ways the United States can help shape the economic future of a region that every

administration over the past two decades has determined to be critical to U.S interests. Whoever is sworn

in on January 20, 2021, must find a way for the United States to reengage the Asia-Pacific region on

trade in general and on CPTPP specifically.
3 0

|

ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

ENDNOTES

1

“Robert E. Lighthizer, “Trump’s Trade Policy Is Making America Stronger,”

Foreign Affairs
, July 20, 2020,

https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2020-07-20/trumps-trade-policy-making-america-stronger
.

2

Heather Long, “25 GOP Senators Urge Trump to Restart TPP Trade Talks, a Deal He Called a ‘Disaster,’”

Washington Post
,

February 20, 2018, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2018/02/20/25-gop-senators-urge-trump-to-restart-

tpp-trade-talks-a-deal-he-called-a-disaster
/.

3

Caitlin Owens and Jonathan Swan, “Chuck Grassley Talks Trade,” Axios, January 13, 2019,

https://www.axios.com/chuck-grassley-interview-trade-china-nafta-5b1a35ed-98d7-455b-8ee7-8a544eaba041.html
.

4

Victoria Scott, 2019. “John Delaney: Rejoining the TPP Allows Us to Compete with China,” Fox Business, October 1, 2019,

https://www.foxbusiness.com/money/john-delaney-tpp-china-trade-war
.

5

Representative Ron Kind, “Leaving TPP Hurts Wisconsin Farmers,” March 15, 2017,

https://kind.house.gov/media-center/in-the-news/leaving-tpp-hurts-wisconsin-farmers
.

6

Geoffrey Gertz, “What Will Trump’s Embrace of Bilateralism Mean for America’s Trade Partners?,” Brookings Institution,

February 8, 2017, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/future-development/2017/02/08/what-will-trumps-embrace-of-

bilateralism-mean-for-americas-trade-partners/
.

7

Ana Swanson, “Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership,”

New York Times
, April 12, 2018,

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/12/us/politics/trump-trans-pacific-partnership.html
.

8

“Democratic Debate Transcript,” NBC News, July 31, 2019, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-election/democratic-

debate-transcript-july-31-2019-n1038016
.

9

Joseph R. Biden, “Why America Must Lead Again,”

Foreign Affairs
, March/April 2020,

https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2020-01-23/why-america-must-lead-again
.

10

McKinsey Global Institute, “Asia’s Future Is Now,” July 14, 2019, https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/asia-pacific/

asias-future-is-now#
.

11

World Trade Organization, “Trade Falls Steeply in First Half of 2020,” June 22, 2020,

https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres20_e/pr858_e.htm
.

12

Cristiano Lima, “Trump Calls Trade Deal ‘a Rape of Our Country,’” Politico, June 28, 2016,

https://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/donald-trump-trans-pacific-partnership-224916
.

13

Eric Bradner, “Clinton's TPP Controversy: What You Need to Know,” CNN, July 27, 2016, https://www.cnn.com/2016/07/27/

politics/tpp-what-you-need-to-know/index.html
.

14

Justin Sink, Toluse Olorunnipa, and Enda Curran, “China Eager to Fill Political Vacuum Created by Trump’s TPP Withdrawal,”

Bloomberg, January 23, 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-23/trump-s-withdrawal-from-asia-trade-

deal-viewed-as-boon-for-china
.

15

Kiyoshi Takenaka, “Japan PM Says TPP Trade Pact Meaningless without U.S.,” Reuters, November 21, 2016,

https://www.reuters.com/article/us-japan-tpp-abe-idUSKBN13G2IK
.

16

Robin Harding, “TPP ‘Has No Meaning’ without US, Says Shinzo Abe,”

Financial Times
, November 21, 2016,

https://www.ft.com/content/59972c38-b058-11e6-a37c-f4a01f1b0fa1
.

17

“Joint Statement from President Donald J. Trump and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe,” February 10, 2017,

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/joint-statement-president-donald-j-trump-prime-minister-shinzo-abe/
.

18

Swanson, “Trump Proposes Rejoining Trans-Pacific Partnership.”

19

“Australia Says ‘No Appetite’ for Major TPP Changes after Donald Trump Signals US May Want to Rejoin,” Agence

France-Presse, April 15, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/news/asia/diplomacy/article/2141781/australia-says-no-appetite-

major-tpp-changes-after-donald-trump.

20

Wolfgang Alschner and Rama Panford-Walsh, “How Much of the Transpacific Partnership Is in the United States-Mexico-

Canada Agreement?” (Working Paper 2019-28, Ottawa Faculty of Law, University of Ottawa, July 4, 2019),

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3410658
.

21

Elizabeth Truss, “Global Britain and the CPTPP
,” UK Department for International Trade, July 3, 2020,

https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/global-britain-and-the-cptpp
.
ASIA SOCIETY POLICY INSTITUTE

REENGAGING THE ASIA-PACIFIC ON TRADE: A TPP ROADMAP FOR THE NEXT U.S. ADMINISTRATION

|

31

22

Elizabeth Truss, “UK and Japan agree historic free trade agreement,” UK Department for International Trade.

September 11, 2020. https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-and-japan-agree-historic-free-trade-agreement

23

Yukako Ono, “Thailand Wants to Join TPP 'as Soon as Possible,' Says Deputy PM,”

Nikkei Asian Review
, May 8, 2018,

https://asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Thailand-wants-to-join-TPP-as-soon-as-possible-says-deputy-PM
.

24

Wendy Cutler, “US Must Take Seriously China's Interest in Pacific Trade Pact,”

Nikkei Asian Review
, June 6, 2020,

https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/US-must-take-seriously-China-s-interest-in-Pacific-trade-pact
.

25

New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, “DEPA Modules,” accessed September 11, 2020,

https://www.mfat.govt.nz/en/trade/free-trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements-concluded-but-not-in-force/digital-economy-

partnership-agreement/depa-modules/.

26

Asia Society Policy Institute, “Charting a Course for Trade and Economic Integration in the Asia-Pacific,” March 7, 2017,

https://asiasociety.org/policy-institute/charting-course-trade-and-economic-integration-asia-pacific
.

27

World Trade Organization, “World Trade Report 2018,” October 3, 2018, https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/

world_trade_report18_e.pdf
.

28

Lydia Saad, “Americans' Vanishing Fear of Foreign Trade,” Gallup, February 26, 2020, https://news.gallup.com/poll/286730/

americans-vanishing-fear-foreign-trade.aspx
.

29

Mark Murray, “Support for Free Trade Reaches New High in NBC/WSJ Poll,” NBC News, August 18, 2019,

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/meet-the-press/support-free-trade-reaches-new-high-nbc-wsj-poll-n1043601
.

30

Chicago Council on Global Affairs, “Poll: Americans View of Trade at an All Time High,” August 27, 2018,

https://www.thechicagocouncil.org/press-release/poll-americans-view-trade-all-time-high
.

31

Bruce Stokes, “Americans, Like Many in Other Advanced Economies, Not Convinced of Trade’s Benefits,” Pew Research

Center, September 26, 2018, https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2018/09/26/americans-like-many-in-other-advanced-

economies-not-convinced-of-trades-benefits/.

32

Josh Hawley, “The W.T.O. Should Be Abolished,”

New York Times
, May 5, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/05/

opinion/hawley-abolish-wto-china.html
.

33

Gary C. Hufbauer and Euijin Jung, “Where Do Democratic Presidential Candidates Stand on Trade?,” Peterson Institute for

International Economics, March 25, 2019, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-watch/where-do-democratic-

presidential-candidates-stand-trade.
For more content related to this report, visit

AsiaSociety.org/TPP-Roadmap

Other Asia Society Policy Institute Reports

China’s Response to Climate Change: A Study in Contrasts and a Policy at a Crossroads

Curbing State-Driven Trade Policies

Climate Diplomacy under a New U.S. Administration

The Avoidable War: The Case for Managed Strategic Competition

Navigating the Belt and Road Initiative

Trade in Trouble: How the Asia Pacific Can Step Up and Lead Reforms

Future Scenarios: What To Expect From a Nuclear North Korea

Strength in Numbers: Collaborative Approaches to Addressing Concerns with

China’s State-led Economic Model

Advancing the U.S.-Korea Economic Agenda

Reconciling Expectations with Reality in a Transitioning Myanmar

Business Sector Action to Drive Carbon Market Cooperation in Northeast Asia

Shifting Trade Winds: U.S. Bilateralism & Asia-Pacific Economic Integration

Northeast Asia and the Next Generation of Carbon Market Cooperation

Preserving the Long Peace in Asia

The Trump Administration’s India Opportunity

Charting a Course for Trade and Economic Integration in the Asia-Pacific

Advice for the 45th U.S. President: Opinions from Across the Pacific

Roadmap to a Northeast Asian Carbon Market

India’s Future in Asia: The APEC Opportunity

Avoiding the Blind Alley: China’s Economic Overhaul and Its Global Implications

Preparing Asians and Americans for a Shared Future

Asia Society is the leading global and pan-Asian organization working to strengthen relationships and promote

understanding among the people, leaders, and institutions of Asia and the United States.

We seek to increase knowledge and enhance dialogue, encourage creative expression, and generate new ideas across

the fields of policy, business, education, arts and culture. Founded in 1956, Asia Society is a nonpartisan, nonprofit

educational institution with offices in Hong Kong, Houston, Los Angeles, Manila, Melbourne, Mumbai, New York,

San Francisco, Seoul, Sydney, Washington, D.C., and Zurich.
Annotations